In this lecture, you'll learn about access control list operations, and there's a few things about
the way that ACLs work that are not that intuitive.
So this is an important lecture to pay attention to because you really need to understand these things
so that you understand how ACLs really work.
If you don't understand, it's going to lead to really confusing things happening and it's going to
make it really difficult for you to troubleshoot those things as well.
So important lecture. OK.
Starting off with how we apply our ACLs.
ACLs are applied
at the interface level with the access-group command.
So you saw in the previous lectures about how we build our ACLs.
We build them with our access control entries, which are the rules which permit or deny the particular traffic.
But that just creates the ACL.
You still have to apply it to make it come into effect. And the way you do
that is at the interface level with the access-group command.
When you are configuring ACLs, don't forget to apply them with the access-group command.
It's actually quite easy to do that.
OK, ACLs can be applied in the inbound or the outbound direction and you can have a maximum of one
ACL per interface, per direction.
You can have both an inbound and an outbound ACL on the same interface, but you can't have two inbound
or two outbound ACLs on the same interface.
And if you think about it, this actually makes sense because we've got our acces control list. They're made
up of entries.
If we had two different ACLs with different entries and we applied them to the same interface coming in to
the same direction, how would the router know which rule to apply if there was conflicting rules
in there? You don't need to have more than one ACL applied to an interface because you can have multiple
rules in the same ACL.
If you did have multiple ones, there could be conflicts. The router wouldn't know what to do.
So that's why we always have a maximum of one ACL per interface, per direction.
Your options are on an interface,
you can have no ACL applied or you could have an inbound ACL only, or you could have an outbound ACL
only, or ACLs in both directions.
So let's talk about this a little bit more as well.
And people can get confused about the ACL direction, but there's a really easy way to not get confused
about it.
And that is to be like Mr. Miyagi in The Karate Kid and be the router.
So if you've got an ACL,
let's say
we've got a router.
And on this arm, I have got an interface
fa0/0 and on this arm, I've got interface fa1/0
And you want to control traffic going from a client,
this arm, going out to a server, this arm.
Well you could either,
there are two ways you could apply the ACL, you could apply it inbound on this arm because when you are
that router, I know it looks silly. You don't have to actually physically do it.
Just do it in your head
if you want. Stick your arms out to the side and say, this is this interface, this is that interface.
And I'm interested in controlling traffic, going from the hosts over here to the servers over there.
Well in that case, I can apply the ACL inbound as it comes in this interface or I can apply it outbound
as it goes out that interface.
So whether it's inbound or outbound,
it depends on the direction of the travel.
If travel is going from here over to here, I can put it inbound here or I can put it
outbound there and it's only going to affect the traffic, which is in one direction.
OK, so you'll see what I mean
first time you run into this. Any time you're thinking, "Oh, should it be in the inbound or outbound direction,
or what is this going to do?"
If you're confused about the direction, just imagine your the router, your arms are the interfaces. Stand
like that.
Think about the direction travel is going in and then it's going to be really easy to understand what's
going on.
OK, how to actually configure our access group configuration? So it was done under the interface. Here,
for example, we've got interface GigabitEthernet0/1. I can say
ip access-group 100 out, ip access-group 101 in
And then to check which access groups or which access list are applied to which interfaces, it's actually easiest
just to do a show running-config. To see this, there is not a really good show
command on this. The specific show command you can use is show ip interface and then the interface number.
But when you do that, you're going to get a lot of very verbose output.
So if you want to just see the access list information, you can pipe it to include access list. Notice that
show ip interface, and not show interface.
Again, to be honest, rather than typing in that big long command, it's easier just to do a show run.
Scroll down to the interfaces and you can see what ACLs are applied there.
If an interface does not have any ACL applied in a particular direction, it would seem not set.
For example, outgoing access-list is not set.
Next thing, super important, the ACL is read by the router from top to bottom. As soon as a rule matches
on the packet, the permit or deny action is applied and the ACL is not processed any further for that packet.
So this means that the order of rules is important.
And I've got an example.
It's going to make it really clear. So our first ACL here,
we've said access-list 1 deny host 10.10.10.10
And then the next line is
access-list 1 permit 10.10.10. 0.0.0.255
So what this will do is it will deny the host 10.10.10.10, but it will permit the rest of
the 10.10.10.0/24 subnet.
So that's what we wanted to do.
We wanted to block just one host, but allow everything else in the subnet.
Now, the second example is going to use exactly the same commands, but I flipped the order around.
So the second example, I've said,
access-list 1 permit 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255
So permitting everything from the 10.10.10.0/24 subnet.
Then access-list 1 deny host 10.10.10.10
access-list 1 deny host 10.10.10.10
Well, what will happen here is, it will permit all from the 10.10.10.0/24 subnet, including
10.10.10.10.
Because when a packet comes in from 10.10.10.10, the router will start processing the ACL
and 10.10.10.10 is in the
10.10.10.0/24 subnet.
So it will match
the first rule and the traffic will be allowed through.
It never gets to the second rule which would deny it because it's read from the top down and as soon
as we get a match, that action is applied. So the second access control list
example here is wrong.
It's not doing what we want it to do.
We would need to do it
the first way. So the order of your access control entry is important and you want to put the most specific entries
up at the top of the list.
The less specific down near at the bottom.
Another thing is we can inject access control entries into an existing ACL. When you create the ACL,
the router will automatically put access control entries on all of your different ACEs and numbers in
increments of 10.
So when you enter, when you put the first command in, it numbers at 10. When you put in the second
one, it numbers at 20 and so on.
So it puts the numbers in for you.
You don't have to do this.
So you can see the example here.
We've got an ACL access-list 110, and we've got four entries in there which are numbered
10, 20, 30 and 40.
The reason for this is, it allows you to later on injector a rule, wherever you want to into an existing
ACL.
So, for example, here, before what we had was rule 10 deny tcp host 10.10.10.10 host 10.10.50.10 eq telnet
10 deny tcp host 10.10.10.10 host 10.10.50.10 eq telnet. Ignore line 15 for now, because that's
what we're going to do in a minute.
And then 20 permit tcp 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255 host 10.10.50.10 eq telnet
So here we're denying host 10.10.10.10.
We're permitting everything else at the
10.10.10.0/24 network.
Well maybe you'd already configured this ACL and then later, you don't want to just deny
10.10.10.10,
You want to deny 10.10.10.11 as well.
Well if you just added a new line for 10.10.10.11, that would go in below the line, which
permits everything in 10.10.10.0/24 subnet and it wouldn't work.
So we need to inject that line higher up than our line 20 permit statement.
So the way we do that is, here we're using a named ACL.
We've got ip access-list extended 110.
Then we say 15 deny tcp host 10.10.10.11 host 10.10.50.10 eq telnet
That will put it higher up in the ACL than rule 20.
So we've got our rules working in the correct order. Support for injecting ACEs in an existing ACL
first came out with Named ACLs.
But you can do it with numbered ACLs as well now.
But the syntax is done the same way that you do it for a Named ACL. Here, you can see me doing, actually
it's a Numbered. I've said ip access-list extended 110. 110 is my Numbered ACL.
I need to use a syntax like this to allow me to inject commands in.
OK, so that's injecting ACEs into an existing ACL.
Next thing, super important again. There's an 'implicit deny any any' rule at the bottom of all ACLs.
So if an ACL is not applied to an interface, well, all traffic is allowed.
You knew that already.
If an ACL is applied, all traffic is denied except what is explicitly allowed because of that 'implicit
deny any any' rule.
It's implicit because you don't have to type it and it's always there.
So if we created an access list. Here, we've said
access-list 1 permit 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255
Below there, there is a 'deny all' command which is always there.
So traffic from 10.10.10.0/24 will be permitted.
Everything else is denied because of the implicit 'deny all' at the bottom of your ACL.
Some organizers or many organizations include an explicit 'deny all' at the end of ACLs to log illegal traffic.
So they actually type in like you see here.
access-list 1 deny any any log. If you're wondering, well, why would they put that in when it denies
anyway? It is so that you can log it, so you can send information out to an external server.
So if somebody is doing something they're not meant to be doing, sending traffic that they shouldn't
be, then you're blocking it.
But you're also going to get a report about that as well.
OK, so with the explicit 'deny all,' it means that when an ACL is applied, all traffic is denied except
what is explicitly allowed in the access control entries that you configured. If you want to reverse that
so that all traffic is permitted except what is explicitly denied,
the way you do it is you add a 'permit all' statement to the end of the ACL. That will then be higher
up than the implicit 'deny any' which is still there.
So here we've said access-list 1 deny 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255
And then access-list 1 permit any. So we'll deny what we said in the first line.
Everything that we haven't explicitly denied is going to be permitted.
Another thing, and this is one that can confuse you, is that ACLs applied to an interface, do not apply
to traffic, which originates from that router itself.
So you see in the example here, we've got routers R1 and R2, and we want to block telnet
traffic going from the host on the left going to the R2 router.
And we've done that with an access control list on R1.
So we said access-list 100 deny tcp any any eq 23. And then, because
we're doing it on interface R1, but we could actually do it inbound on interface fa0/0 or we
could do it outbound on inteface fa1/0. Hopefully you see what I mean now about the holding
your arms thing and you'll be able to figure out the direction. Traffic here is going from left to right.
So if we want to control that, we could control it either with an inbound ACL on 0/0 or an outbound
ACL on 1/0.
OK, so we've done that and this ACL will work.
It will stop the host on the left from telnetting to R2.
However, if we go on the command line on R1, we will be able to telnet to R2.
That shouldn't work because I've done my ACL outbound on interface fa1/0 in R1 and the
traffic is going out to that interface.
The reason it will work ist that ACLs do not apply to traffic that comes from the router itself.
So if we want to block telnet traffic from the PCs and from R1 as well, don't do the ACL in
R1.
Do the ACL inbound on R2.
OK, so that is everything about how to configure and understand and verify our ACLs.
In the next lecture, I'll show you how to do it with a lab demo.